Monitor gcp tutorial (#423)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/monitor-gcp.asciidoc

service account:

_Compute Viewer_:

image::monitor-gcp-service-account-roles-compute-viewer.png[Service account roles compute viewer]

_Monitoring Viewer_:

image::monitor-gcp-service-account-roles-monitoring-viewer.png[Service account roles monitoring viewer]

The final result should be the following:

image::monitor-gcp-service-account-roles-final.png[Service account roles result]

Click on *continue*, then skip granting users access to this service. Finally,
click on *done* and the service account will be ready to be used.

Next, in order to use the service account click on create keys and create the
JSON key type.

image::monitor-gcp-service-account-create-key.png[Service account create key]

After clicking on create key, the credential file is downloaded. Keep this file
in a accessible place to use later.

[discrete]
=== Step 2: Install and configure {metricbeat}

In order to monitor {gcp} using the Elastic Stack you need two main components:
an Elastic deployment to store and analyze the data and an agent to collect
and ship the data.

[NOTE]
====
This {tutorial} assumes the Elastic cluster is already running and ready

> to be used. Make sure you have your *cloudid* and your *credentials* in hand.

Reviewer: shoud be `cloud id` (with a space?)

====

> There are two agents that can be used to monitor {gcp}. {metricbeat} is used to

Reviewer 2: Adding on to Eamonn's suggestion...

```suggestion
Two agents can be used to monitor {gcp}: {metricbeat} is used to
```

monitor metrics and {filebeat} to monitor logs. You can run the agents in any
machine. This {tutorial} uses a small {gcp} instance, e2-small (2 vCPUs,
2 GB memory), with an Ubuntu distribution.

[discrete]
==== Install metricbeat

After starting and connecting to the GCP instance, download and install
{metricbeat}.

include::{beats-repo-dir}/tab-widgets/install-widget-metricbeat.asciidoc[]

[discrete]
==== Set up assets

{metricbeat} comes with predefined assets for parsing, indexing, and visualizing
your data. Run the following command to load these assets.
It may take a few minutes.

[NOTE]
=====
Substitute the Cloud ID from your deployment in the following command. To find

> your Cloud ID Click on your deployment in https://cloud.elastic.co/deployments

Reviewer 2: Adding on, I would format this as a text link:

```suggestion
your Cloud ID, click on your https://cloud.elastic.co/deployments[deployment].
```

=====
[source,bash]
----
./metricbeat setup -e -E 'cloud.id=YOUR_DEPLOYMENT_CLOUD_ID' -E 'cloud.auth=elastic:YOUR_SUPER_SECRET_PASS'
----
[IMPORTANT]
====
Setting up {metricbeat} is an admin-level task that requires extra privileges.

> As a best practice, https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/metricbeat/7.11/privileges-to-setup-beats.html[use an administrator role to set up]

Reviewer 2: We use [attributes](https://github.com/elastic/docs/blob/master/shared/attributes.asciidoc) to format cross-doc links. This enables link checking in our documentation build.

```suggestion
As a best practice, {metricbeat-ref}/privileges-to-setup-beats.html[use an administrator role to set up],
```

+
[source,bash]
----
./metricbeat keystore create
echo -n "<Your Deployment Cloud ID>" | ./metricbeat keystore add CLOUD_ID --stdin
----

. To store metrics in {es} with minimal permissions, create an API key to send
data from {metricbeat} to {ess}. Log into Kibana (you can do so from the Cloud
Console without typing in any permissions) and select *Management* -> *Dev
Tools*. Then, send the following request:
+
[source,console]
----
POST /_security/api_key
{
  "name": "metricbeat-monitor-gcp",
  "role_descriptors": {
    "metricbeat_writer": {
      "cluster": ["monitor", "read_ilm"],
      "index": [
        {
          "names": ["metricbeat-*"],
          "privileges": ["view_index_metadata", "create_doc"]
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
----

. The response contains an `api_key` and an `id` field, which can be stored in
the {metricbeat} keystore in the following format: `id:api_key`.
+
[source,bash]
----
echo -n "IhrJJHMB4JmIUAPLuM35:1GbfxhkMT8COBB4JWY3pvQ" | ./metricbeat keystore add ES_API_KEY --stdin
----
+
[NOTE]
=====
Make sure you specify the `-n` parameter; otherwise, you will have
painful debugging sessions, due to adding a newline at the end of
your API key.
=====

> . To see if both settings have been stored, run `./metricbeat keystore list`.

Author: Thanks. We need to add a `+` to link the blocks because we are using `.` to have numbering. I implemented the change manually.

. Then, configure {metricbeat} to output to {ess}. Edit the `metricbeat.yml`
configuration file and add the following lines to the end of the file.
+
[source,yml]
----
cloud.id: ${CLOUD_ID}
output.elasticsearch:
  api_key: ${ES_API_KEY}
----

. Finally, test if the configuration is working. If it is not working,
verify if you used the right credentials and add them again.
+
[source,bash]
----
./metricbeat test output
----

Now that the output is working you are going to setup the input (GCP).

[discrete]
=== Step 3: Configure {metricbeat} Google Cloud Platform module

In order to collect metrics from Google Cloud Platform, use the

> https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/metricbeat/current/metricbeat-module-gcp.html[Google Cloud Platform]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{metricbeat-ref}/metricbeat-module-gcp.html[Google Cloud Platform]
```

module. This module periodically fetches monitoring metrics from Google Cloud
Platform using
https://cloud.google.com/monitoring/api/metrics_gcp[Stackdriver Monitoring API]
for Google Cloud Platform services.

[WARNING]
====
Extra GCP charges on Stackdriver Monitoring API requests may be generated by
this module. Please see

> https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/metricbeat/current/metricbeat-module-gcp.html#gcp-api-requests[rough estimation of the number of API calls]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{metricbeat-ref}/metricbeat-module-gcp.html#gcp-api-requests[rough estimation of the number of API calls]
```

for more details.
====

. First, enable the GCP module.
+
[source,bash]
----
./metricbeat modules enable gcp
----

. Next, edit the `modules.d/gcp.yml` file to configure which metrics to
collect.
+
[source,yml]
----
- module: googlecloud
  metricsets:
    - compute <1>
  zone: "" <2>

>   project_id: "elastic-education" <3>

Reviewer: you may want to change that id, as it is not something readers can identify with?

  period: 1m <4>
  credentials_file_path: "/home/ubuntu/credentials.json" <5>
----
+
<1> The `compute` metricset is a predefined metricset that collects some
GCP compute metrics.
<2> Defines which zones to monitor, an empty value collects data from *all* zones
<3> Collects metrics within the `elastic-education` project-id.
<4> Collects metrics every minute
<5> The GCP credential file that you generated earlier. (Don't forget to create
the file if it does not exist and to use the correct full path).

. Now, test the input to check if {metricbeat} can collect data.
[source,bash]
+
----

> ./metricbeat test modules gcp

Reviewer: Mention what a good/bad response here looks like, so the user knows, that the setup worked?

----

> . Input and output are ready. Next, start {metricbeat} to collect the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. When the input and output are ready, start {metricbeat} to collect the data.
```

+
[source,bash]
----
./metricbeat -e
----

> . Finally, go to Kibana and open the "[{metricbeat} GCP] Compute Overview"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Finally, log into {kib} and open the *[{metricbeat} GCP] Compute Overview*
```

dashboard.
+
image:monitor-gcp-compute-overview-dashboard.png[{metricbeat} compute overview dashboard]

[discrete]
=== Step 4: Install and configure {filebeat}

> Now that {metricbeat} is up and running you will configure {filebeat} to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that {metricbeat} is up and running, configure {filebeat} to
```

collect Google Cloud logs.

[discrete]
==== Install {filebeat}

On a new terminal window connected to the GCP instance, download and install
{filebeat}.

include::{beats-repo-dir}/tab-widgets/install-widget-filebeat.asciidoc[]

[discrete]
==== Set up assets

Similar to {metricbeat}, {filebeat} comes with predefined assets for parsing,
indexing, and visualizing your data.
Run the following command to load these assets. It may take a few minutes.

[source,bash]
----
./filebeat setup -e -E 'cloud.id=YOUR_DEPLOYMENT_CLOUD_ID' -E 'cloud.auth=elastic:YOUR_SUPER_SECRET_PASS'
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
Setting up {filebeat} is an admin-level task that requires extra privileges.

> As a best practice, https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/7.11/privileges-to-setup-beats.html[use an administrator role to set up]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a best practice, {filebeat-ref}/privileges-to-setup-beats.html[use an administrator role to set up]
```

and a more restrictive role for event publishing (which you will do next).
====

[discrete]
==== Configure {filebeat} output

Next, you are going to configure {filebeat} output to {ess}.

. Use the {filebeat} keystore to store {filebeat-ref}/keystore.html[secure
settings]. Store the Cloud ID in the keystore.
+
[source,bash]
----
./filebeat keystore create
echo -n "<Your Deployment Cloud ID>" | ./filebeat keystore add CLOUD_ID --stdin
----

. To store logs in {es} with minimal permissions, create an API key to send

> data from {filebeat} to {ess}. Log into Kibana (you can do so from the Cloud

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
data from {filebeat} to {ess}. Log into {kib} (you can do so from the Cloud
```

Console without typing in any permissions) and select *Management* -> *Dev

> Tools*. Then, send the following request:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tools*. Send the following request:
```

+
[source,console]
----
POST /_security/api_key
{
  "name": "filebeat-monitor-gcp",
  "role_descriptors": {
    "filebeat_writer": {
      "cluster": ["monitor", "read_ilm", "cluster:admin/ingest/pipeline/get", "cluster:admin/ingest/pipeline/put"],
      "index": [
        {
          "names": ["filebeat-*"],
          "privileges": ["view_index_metadata", "create_doc"]
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
----
+
[NOTE]
----
{filebeat} needs two special cluster permissions

> `cluster:admin/ingest/pipeline/get` and `cluster:admin/ingest/pipeline/put`.

Reviewer: this note is hard to read and provides no context why it's here

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/667544/109948654-d436ad80-7cda-11eb-95d0-bcf2d1c85ff0.png)

Author: tried to improve readability and context. let me know what do you think.

----

. The response contains an `api_key` and an `id` field, which can be stored in
the {filebeat} keystore in the following format: `id:api_key`.
+
[source,bash]
----
echo -n "IhrJJHMB4JmIUAPLuM35:1GbfxhkMT8COBB4JWY3pvQ" | ./filebeat keystore add ES_API_KEY --stdin
----
+
[NOTE]
=====
Make sure you specify the `-n` parameter; otherwise, you will have

> painful debugging sessions, due to adding a newline at the end of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
painful debugging sessions due to adding a newline at the end of
```

your API key.
=====

> . To see if both settings have been stored, run `./filebeat keystore list`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To see if both settings have been stored, run the following command:

 [source,bash]
----
./filebeat keystore list
----
```

> . Then, configure {filebeat} to output to {ess}. Edit the `filebeat.yml`
> configuration file and add the following lines to the end of the file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To configure {filebeat} to output to {ess}, edit the `filebeat.yml`
configuration file. Add the following lines to the end of the file.
```

+
[source,yml]
----
cloud.id: ${CLOUD_ID}
output.elasticsearch:
  api_key: ${ES_API_KEY}
----

. Finally, test if the configuration is working. If it is not working,

> verify if you used the right credentials and add them again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
verify that you used the right credentials and, if necessary, add them again.
```

+
[source,bash]
----
./filebeat test output
----

> Now that the output is working you are going to setup the input ({gcp}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that the output is working, you are going to set up the input ({gcp}).
```

[discrete]
=== Step 5: Configure {filebeat} Google Cloud module

> In order to collect logs from Google Cloud Platform, use the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To collect logs from Google Cloud Platform, use the
```

> https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/beats/filebeat/current/filebeat-module-gcp.html[Google Cloud Platform]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{filebeat-ref}/filebeat-module-gcp.html[Google Cloud Platform]
```

module. This module periodically fetches logs that have been exported from
Stackdriver to a Google Pub/Sub topic sink. There are three available filesets:
`audit`, `vpcflow`, `firewall`. This tutorial covers the `audit` fileset.

> . First, you need to configure {gcp} to export logs to a Pub/Sub topic. You can
> do that by navigating to the *Logs Router* page (use the search bar):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Go to the *Logs Router* page (use the search bar) to configure {gcp} to export logs to a Pub/Sub topic.
```

Author: edited a bit.

+
image::monitor-gcp-navigate-logs-router.png[Navigate to Logs Router page]
+

> Then, click on *create sink* to set up the logs routing sink.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To set up the logs routing sink, click  *Create sink*.
```

Set *sink name* as `monitor-gcp-audit-sink`. Select the *Cloud Pub/Sub topic* as the

> *sink service* and *Create new Cloud Pub/Sub topic* named `monitor-gcp-audit`.

Reviewer 3: From the screenshot, I wasn't too sure where you `Create new Cloud Pub/Sub topic named monitor-gcp-audit`. Is this under Sink destination?

Reviewer 3: Yes that would be great. Thanks!

> Finally, add `logName:"cloudaudit.googleapis.com"` in the *logs to
> include in sink* (it includes all audit logs) and click on *create sink*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, under *Choose logs to include in sink* (it includes all audit logs), add `logName:"cloudaudit.googleapis.com"`. Click *Create sink*.
```

Reviewer 3: Looks good.

It will look something like the following:
+
image::monitor-gcp-create-sink.png[Create logs routing sink]

. Now that GCP is configured to export audit logs, enable {filebeat} Google Cloud module.
+
[source,bash]
----
./filebeat modules enable gcp
----

> . Then, write the following configuration to the `modules.d/gcp.yml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Edit the `modules.d/gcp.yml` file with the following configurations.
```

+
[source,yml]
----
- module: gcp
  vpcflow:
    enabled: false <1>
  firewall:
    enabled: false <1>
  audit:
    enabled: true <2>
    var.project_id: "elastic-education" <3>
    var.topic: "monitor-gcp-audit" <4>
    var.subscription_name: "monitor-gcp-audit-sub" <5>
    var.credentials_file: "/home/ubuntu/credentials.json" <6>
----
+
<1> Disables both `vpcflow` and `firewall` filesets.
<2> Enables the `audit` fileset.
<3> Collects data within the `elastic-education` project-id.
<4> Collects logs from the `monitor-gcp-audit` topic.
<5> Google Cloud Pub/Sub topic subscription name. If the subscription does not
exist it will be created.
<6> The GCP credential file that you generated earlier. (Don't forget to create
the file if it does not exist and to use the correct full path).

> . Next, start {filebeat} to collect the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Start {filebeat} to collect the logs.
```

+
[source,bash]
----
./filebeat -e
----

> . Finally, go to Kibana and open the "[{filebeat} GCP] Audit"
> dashboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Finally, log into {kib} and open the *[{filebeat} GCP] Audit*
dashboard.
```

:tutorial: tutorial
:gcp: GCP

[[monitor-gcp]]
== Monitor Google Cloud Platform

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to monitor your Google Cloud Platform ({gcp})
deployments using Elastic Observability: Logs and Metrics.

[discrete]
=== What you'll learn

You'll learn how to:

- Set up a {gcp} Service Account
- Ingest metrics using the {metricbeat-ref}/metricbeat-module-gcp.html[{metricbeat}
Google Cloud Platform module] and view those metrics in {kib}.
- Export GCP audit logs through Pub/Sub topics
- Ingest logs using the {filebeat-ref}/filebeat-module-gcp.html[{filebeat}

> Google Cloud module] and view those logs in {kib}.

Reviewer 2: Two of these don't have periods and two do–can you add or remove periods to make these consistent please

Reviewer 2: This would be my recommendation, but either way works

```suggestion
- Set up a {gcp} Service Account.
- Ingest metrics using the {metricbeat-ref}/metricbeat-module-gcp.html[{metricbeat}
Google Cloud Platform module] and view those metrics in {kib}.
- Export GCP audit logs through Pub/Sub topics.
- Ingest logs using the {filebeat-ref}/filebeat-module-gcp.html[{filebeat}
Google Cloud module] and view those logs in {kib}.
```

[discrete]
=== Before you begin

Create a deployment using our hosted {ess} on {ess-trial}[{ecloud}].

> The deployment includes an {es} cluster for storing and searching your data
> , and {kib} for visualizing and managing your data.

Reviewer 2: This renders with a weird gap before the comma. Editing to fix that:

```suggestion
The deployment includes an {es} cluster for storing and searching your data,
and {kib} for visualizing and managing your data.
```
